The remote archive protocol
Version 2; version 1 is served beside it until retired (section 11)

A scope's archive is sealed evidence, and its ledger records every seal
(doc/formats.org). The ledger stays with the scope. The archive need
not: its bytes can be kept by a keeper, a server reached at a URL, and
fetched when they are read. This document says what passes between a
client, which seals and reads, and the keeper of one ledger's archive.

It names no product. Any server that does what is written here is a
keeper, and poslib and pyposlib are clients of any. Which keeper a scope
uses is the scope's configuration and not this document's.


1. The ledger and its base URL

A keeper keeps archives by ledger. A ledger is known by its ledger_id,
the UUID its events carry, and the keeper gives each ledger a base URL.
A ledger begun before events carried one has first events that name no
ledger (doc/formats.org, "Events"); section 3 says how a keeper knows
whose they are. Every request below is made beneath that URL. How a
client learns the URL, and how a keeper decides to keep a ledger at all,
are outside the protocol.

A keeper holds two things for a ledger: its events, as the bytes of the
ledger's files, and the blocks of what those events enrol. It never
holds the only copy of the events. The scope's ledger is the record;
the keeper's copy lets it verify what it is sent and lets the two be
compared.


2. The operations

describe    GET {base}/

    What the keeper holds of the ledger, as a JSON object:

        protocol    the lowest version the keeper serves, 1 or 2
        protocols   every version it serves, ascending: [1, 2] or [2]
        retiring    by version, the date, YYYY-MM-DD, after which the
                    keeper may stop serving it (section 11); absent
                    where no version is retiring
        ledger_id   the ledger's id, or null if it has no event yet
        head        what names its last event, or null
        events      how many events it holds
        root        the root its last event recorded, or null
        erased      the CIDs whose bytes it has erased, sorted

    A keeper that has agreed to keep the ledger and holds no event of
    it yet answers with events 0 and with ledger_id, head and root
    null. A keeper that keeps no ledger at {base} refuses describe, as
    it does every operation there, as absent.

    protocol is the lowest version so that a client of version 1, which
    knows only that member, reads what it always did. A client reads
    protocols where it is present and protocol where it is not.

event       GET {base}/events/{number}

    The bytes of event {number}, counting from 1, exactly as the
    ledger's file holds them.

held        POST {base}/blocks

    Which of some blocks the keeper does not hold. The body is a JSON
    array of CIDs; the answer is a JSON object:

        missing     the CIDs of the array the keeper holds no block
                    for, in the array's order

    A block is held whether an event enrols it or not (section 3,
    "Blocks held and not yet enrolled"). A body that is not an array of
    CIDs is refused as request; one longer than the keeper takes, as
    size. A keeper takes an array of at least 1024 CIDs.

put         PUT {base}/blocks/{cid}

    One block: the bytes {cid} names, as the body, with content type
    application/octet-stream. The keeper hashes what arrives and keeps
    it only if it is the block {cid} names; else it refuses as entry.
    The answer is 201 if the block was not held before and 200 if it
    was, and either way the block is held. A body larger than the
    keeper takes is refused as size; a keeper takes at least 1048576
    bytes, the largest block of an archive under the import profile
    doc/formats.org names, so any block of an archive can be put.

    Putting is safe to repeat: a client that lost the answer puts
    again. A client puts the blocks of a file in any order, and puts
    none the keeper says it holds.

append      POST {base}/events

    One event, and what the client says of itself. The body is
    multipart/form-data, its parts in this order:

        name        the ledger file's name, NNNNNNNN-NAME.json
        event       the file's bytes
        claims      a JSON object of strings (section 6)
        {name}      zero or more later events, in order, each part
                    named by its ledger file's name and holding that
                    file's bytes (section 3, "Whose an event is")

    No two parts have one name. An append of version 2 carries no
    file: the bytes an event enrols are put as blocks before it is
    appended, and a part named by a CID is refused as request. An
    append of version 1 carries files as parts named by their CIDs
    (section 11).

    The answer is the description after the event, as describe gives
    it: 201 if the event was appended, 200 if that event was already
    the one of that number.

read        GET {base}/ipfs/{cid}
            GET {base}/ipfs/{cid}/{path}

    The bytes of what the ledger enrols under {cid}: a file, an event,
    or with {path} the file at that path beneath a directory. The path
    is percent-encoded, segment by segment. This is the IPFS gateway's
    path, so a gateway holding the same blocks answers the same.
    Reading a directory itself is not in this protocol. A block held
    but enrolled by no event is not read: it is absent here until an
    event enrols it.


3. What a keeper verifies

A keeper takes nothing on trust. Before it keeps anything of an append:

  - The name is an event file's, its number the next the ledger needs,
    and what names it is what the bytes give: the SHA-256 for an event
    of schema 1 or 2, the CID for one of schema 3.
  - The event is a valid next event of the chain it holds, as
    doc/formats.org specifies under "Events": its keys, its schema, its
    previous, its ledger_id, its entries. A schema 3 event is read
    strictly, as a block.
  - The event is this ledger's ("Whose an event is", below).
  - Each block put, and each file an append of version 1 carries, has
    the CID it is named by.
  - For a schema 3 event, every entry the ledger then enrols has its
    bytes held, hidden entries apart, which IPFS would leave out; and
    the ledger folds to the event's root (doc/formats.org, "From an
    inventory").

An entry's bytes are held when the block its CID names is held and so
is every block that one links, through every level of the file's DAG
(doc/formats.org, "Content identifiers"): a file of one chunk is its one raw leaf, and
a larger file is its file nodes and their leaves. Each is held from a
put, from a file an append of version 1 carried, which the keeper
splits into its blocks, or from an earlier event. Directory nodes are
not sent: the keeper derives them when it folds the root, sharded as
IPFS shards them.

Events of schema 1 and 2 are kept without their files being required,
since they belong to a ledger being replayed whose root only its
conversion to schema 3 makes checkable. An archive is kept from a
schema 3 event onward: the conversion event, or a ledger's first.

A keeper may refuse more than this, a body too large or a caller not
allowed. It may not accept less.

Blocks held and not yet enrolled. A block put before any event enrols
it is held for at least seven days from when it was last put. After
that the keeper may forget a block that no event it holds enrols;
putting it again, within the seven days or after, holds it afresh.
A client resuming a seal interrupted longer ago asks held and puts what
is missing. Forgetting such a block is not erasure (section 7): no
event names it, nothing lists it, and a later put restores it. Once an
event enrols a block, the keeper holds it as it holds everything the
ledger enrols.

Putting a block and asking what is held are allowed to whoever may
append (section 8): a put is the first half of an append.

Whose an event is. A keeper that has agreed to keep one ledger at
{base} takes no event of another. The ledger an event belongs to is the
one named by the chain the event ends, the events held and then the
event: the ledger_id of the last of them that has one.

Where that chain names no ledger, the event is one of the first events
of a ledger begun before events carried a ledger_id, and nothing in it
says whose it is. A keeper takes it only with later events that do:

  - The client sends, with the event, the events after it in the
    ledger, in order, up to and including the first that has a
    ledger_id.
  - The keeper verifies that they are valid next events of the chain,
    after the event, as it verifies an event to be appended, and that
    the ledger they name is the one it keeps.

Each event's previous is the hash of the event before it, so the event
that names the ledger could follow no other first events than these.
The later events are verified and not kept: each is appended when it
is sent in its turn, with its own later events if it too names no
ledger. A keeper reads later events only for an event whose chain
names no ledger.

An event that is not shown to be this ledger's is refused as identity:
one whose chain names another ledger, and one whose chain names none
when no later events are sent, when they name no ledger, or when they
name another. Later events that are not valid next events are refused
by the kind an append of them would be. Nothing of a refused append is
kept.

A ledger in which no event has a ledger_id cannot be shown to be the
one a keeper keeps. Its next seal writes an event that names it
(doc/formats.org, "Plans"), and it is kept after that.


4. Refusals

A refusal is a status and a JSON object with the member refused, the
kind, and possibly message, for a person. A client goes by the kind.

    409  chain       the event is not the next one: another number, or
                     another event already at that number
    422  sequence    the name is not the event's
    422  encoding    a schema 3 event is not a block
    422  identity    the event is another ledger's, or names no ledger
                     and is not followed by events that name this one
    422  entry       bytes are not their CID's, or bytes the ledger
                     enrols are not held
    422  root        the ledger does not fold to the event's root
    422  request     the request is not as section 2 has it
    422  version     the request is in a version the keeper does not
                     serve (section 11); the object's protocols member
                     lists those it does
    413  size        the body is larger than the keeper takes, or the
                     array longer
    401, 403  access the caller may not do this
    404  absent      no ledger kept at {base}, no such event, or
                     nothing the ledger enrols there
    410  erased      the bytes were erased (section 7)

Kinds a keeper takes from doc/formats.org keep their names there. A
status with no such object is read by the table above, and anything
else, or no answer at all, is the kind remote.


5. The same event twice, and catching up

Appending is safe to repeat. An event sent again at the number it
already has answers 200 and changes nothing, so a client that lost the
answer sends again. A different event at a number already taken is
refused as chain, and so is an event beyond the next: the keeper holds
a ledger other than the one the client has, and nothing is merged.

A client behind the keeper, as after a crash between the keeper's
answer and writing its own ledger file, asks describe, fetches the
events it lacks by number, verifies them as it verifies its own ledger,
and writes them. A keeper behind the client is sent the events it
lacks, in order.

A seal interrupted while its blocks were being put is resumed, not
restarted: the client lists the blocks of the files the event enrols,
asks held, puts those missing, and appends. A disruption loses at most
the block in flight. The blocks of each file are listed from the file's
bytes alone (doc/formats.org, "Content identifiers"), so nothing of the interrupted
attempt need have been kept by the client.


6. Claims

claims is what the client says about where the event came from: the
repository's remotes, the commit the canon was at, whether the working
tree was clean, the scope's path, the tool and its version. A keeper
records them with the event as the client's words. It verifies none of
them and decides nothing by them: the event and the files are what is
checked, and who is calling is the keeper's to establish.


7. Erasure

A keeper may be required to erase bytes. It forgets the block, keeps
the events, lists the CID in erased, and answers a read of it with 410.
The ledger is unchanged: it still says what was sealed, and the CID
still names it.


8. Who is calling

A request may carry "Authorization: Bearer {token}". What a token is
and what its bearer may read or append are the keeper's.

A keeper whose tokens come from an OAuth 2.0 authorization server may
say how a person gets one. It then answers a request that carries no
token it accepts with 401 and

    WWW-Authenticate: Bearer resource_metadata="{url}"

and answers GET {url}, with no token, with a JSON object (RFC 9728,
which gives its usual place: /.well-known/oauth-protected-resource at
the keeper's origin):

    resource                the keeper's origin
    authorization_servers   an array holding one issuer
    scopes_supported        the scopes a client asks for
    client_id               the public client a sealing tool signs in as

A keeper that says none of this is given a token by other means, or
none.

Signing in. A client signs a person in when asked to, and at no other
time: a seal or a check never opens a browser. Asked, it reads the
keeper's object, then the issuer's own at
{issuer}/.well-known/openid-configuration, and follows the
authorization code flow with PKCE (RFC 7636, method S256) to a loopback
address (RFC 8252):

  - It listens on a free port of 127.0.0.1 and sends the person's
    browser to authorization_endpoint with response_type=code, the
    client_id, redirect_uri=http://localhost:{port}/callback, the
    scopes with offline_access added, a state, and the code challenge.
  - The browser comes back to the callback with a code and that state.
  - It exchanges the code at token_endpoint, with the verifier and no
    secret, for an access token and, where the issuer gives one, a
    refresh token.

Tokens kept. What signing in yields is kept in one file both libraries
read: {config}/pos/tokens.json, where {config} is $XDG_CONFIG_HOME or
~/.config. It is readable by its owner alone, mode 0600, and replaced
whole by a rename. It holds a JSON object:

    tokens    by "{issuer} {client_id}": access_token; expires_at, in
              seconds since the epoch; refresh_token, or null; scopes
    keepers   by a keeper's origin: its issuer and client_id

Which token a request carries:

  - The environment's POS_ARCHIVE_TOKEN, if set.
  - Else the token kept for the keeper's origin. If it expires within a
    minute and a refresh token is kept, it is first refreshed at the
    issuer's token_endpoint (grant_type=refresh_token) and the file
    rewritten.
  - Else none.

A client answered 401 by an origin it has no entry for reads that
origin's object, at its usual place. If a token is kept for the issuer
and client it names, the client records the origin under keepers and
makes the request again, once. So signing in to one of a keeper's
ledgers serves its others. Still refused, the request is refused as
access, and the client says to sign in.

fixtures/signin/ holds kept files, each with the token a request to
each of several keepers then carries, or null.


9. The ports

A client's code calls the operations through a port, so that a keeper
can be HTTP, a test's tape, or another transport.

  - pyposlib: remote.RemoteArchive, a typing.Protocol, with
    HttpRemoteArchive its wire and Keeper the keeping side in memory;
    remote.following gives the later events an append is sent with.
    held and put are its methods of those names.
  - poslib: the generic functions pos-remote-describe,
    pos-remote-event, pos-remote-held, pos-remote-put,
    pos-remote-append and pos-remote-read, with pos-remote-http the
    wire; pos-remote-following gives the later events an append is
    sent with.


10. Fixtures

fixtures/remote/ holds tapes. A tape has a base url, a token, and
exchanges in order, each:

    call        the operation and its arguments
    request     the method, the path beneath the base URL, the
                Authorization header, and for a request with a body,
                an append, a put or held, the content type and the
                SHA-256 of the body
    response    the status and the body
    result      what the call returns: an object, or for event and
                read an object whose bytes is the body
    refused     in place of result, the kind

A client must make each request as recorded and make of the response
the result or refusal recorded. A keeper, sent a tape's requests in
order from empty, must answer with the status recorded and the body
recorded, or for a refusal the kind. A tape may have ledger_id, the
ledger its keeper has agreed to keep; without it the keeper keeps
whichever ledger it is first sent. A tape may have protocols, the
versions its keeper serves; without it they are 1 and 2. An append's
call may have following, the later events sent with it, each a name
and an event; one of version 1 may have files, by CID.

For the request bodies to compare, the clients here write multipart one
way: each part is

    --{boundary} CRLF
    Content-Disposition: form-data; name="{name}" CRLF CRLF
    {bytes} CRLF

then --{boundary}-- CRLF, the later events in the ledger's order, then
the files in order of their CIDs, claims as canonical JSON, and the boundary "pos-" followed by the SHA-256, in
hex, of the parts' bytes one after another. A keeper accepts any
multipart/form-data body with those parts.


11. Versions

A keeper serves one or more versions of this protocol and lists them
in describe as protocols. A client speaks the highest version it knows
that the keeper lists. A request in a version the keeper does not
serve is refused as version, and the refusal lists those it does, so a
client that cannot speak any of them fails with a plain reason to be
upgraded.

Version 1. What differs in it is this. Its describe has protocol
alone, without protocols or retiring. Its append carries the bytes of files the event
or earlier events enrol, as parts after the later events, each named
by the CID of the bytes it holds, the files in order of their CIDs,
and the keeper splits each into its blocks and verifies them as
section 3 says. It has no held and no put. A keeper that lists 1
serves appends of either kind at {base}/events, telling them apart by
whether a part is named by a CID, and verifies both the same.

Retiring a version. A keeper that means to stop serving a version
names the date in describe, under retiring, and keeps serving it until
that date. A client whose only version is one that is retiring warns
on every run that it must be upgraded by then. After the date the
keeper may drop the version from protocols and refuse it as version.
The claims each event carries (section 6) name the tool and its commit
that made it, so a keeper sees which tools still speak a version and
sets the date from use rather than guesswork.

Version 1 is retired when no keeper lists it. Its text then leaves this
document, which keeps a line saying that the version existed; the text
itself stays in the document's history.
